Insurance Practice
Insurance 2030—  
The impact of AI on the 
future of insurance
The industry is on the verge of a seismic, tech-driven shift. A focus on 
four areas can position carriers to embrace this change.
March 2021
© Imaginima/Getty Imagesby Ramnath Balasubramanian, Ari Libarikian, and Doug McElhaney
Welcome to the future of insurance,  as seen 
through the eyes of Scott, a customer in the year 
2030. His digital personal assistant orders him a 
vehicle with self-driving capabilities for a meeting 
across town. Upon hopping into the arriving car, 
Scott decides he wants to drive today and moves 
the car into “active” mode. Scott’s personal 
assistant maps out a potential route and shares 
it with his mobility insurer, which immediately 
responds with an alternate route that has a much 
lower likelihood of accidents and auto damage as 
well as the calculated adjustment to his monthly 
premium. Scott’s assistant notifies him that his 
mobility insurance premium will increase by 4 to 
8 percent based on the route he selects and the 
volume and distribution of other cars on the road. 
It also alerts him that his life insurance policy, 
which is now priced on a “pay-as-you-live” basis, 
will increase by 2 percent for this quarter. The 
additional amounts are automatically debited from 
his bank account.
When Scott pulls into his destination’s parking 
lot, his car bumps into one of several parking 
signs. As soon as the car stops moving, its internal 
diagnostics determine the extent of the damage. 
His personal assistant instructs him to take three 
pictures of the front right bumper area and two of 
the surroundings. By the time Scott gets back to 
the driver’s seat, the screen on the dash informs 
him of the damage, confirms the claim has been 
approved, and reports that a mobile response drone 
has been dispatched to the lot for inspection. If the 
vehicle is drivable, it may be directed to the nearest 
in-network garage for repair after a replacement 
vehicle arrives.
While this scenario may seem beyond the horizon, 
such integrated user stories will emerge across 
all lines of insurance with increasing frequency 
over the next decade. In fact, all the technologies 
required above already exist, and many are available 
to consumers. With the new wave of deep learning 
techniques, such as convolutional neural networks,1 artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to live 
up to its promise of mimicking the perception, 
reasoning, learning, and problem solving of the 
human mind (Exhibit 1). In this evolution, insurance 
will shift from its current state of “detect and repair” 
to “predict and prevent,” transforming every aspect 
of the industry in the process. The pace of change 
will also accelerate as brokers, consumers, financial 
intermediaries, insurers, and suppliers become 
more adept at using advanced technologies to 
enhance decision making and productivity, lower 
costs, and optimize the customer experience.
As AI becomes more deeply integrated in the 
industry, carriers must position themselves to 
respond to the changing business landscape. 
Insurance executives must understand the factors 
that will contribute to this change and how AI will 
reshape claims, distribution, and underwriting 
and pricing. With this understanding, they can 
start to build the skills and talent, embrace the 
emerging technologies, and create the culture and 
perspective needed to be successful players in the 
insurance industry of the future.
Four AI-related trends  
shaping insurance
AI’s underlying technologies are already being 
deployed in our businesses, homes, and vehicles, 
as well as on our person. The disruption from 
COVID-19 changed the timelines for the adoption 
of AI by significantly accelerating digitization for 
insurers. Virtually overnight, organizations had 
to adjust to accommodate remote workforces, 
expand their digital capabilities to support 
distribution, and upgrade their online channels. 
While most organizations likely didn’t invest heavily 
in AI during the pandemic, the increased emphasis 
on digital technologies and a greater willingness to 
embrace change will put them in a better position 
to incorporate AI into their operations.
1 Convolutional neural networks contain millions of simulated “neurons” structured in layers.
2
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
2 World Economic Forum, 2015.  Four core technology trends, tightly coupled with 
(and sometimes enabled by) AI, will reshape the 
insurance industry over the next decade.
Explosion of data from connected devices 
In industrial settings, equipment with sensors have 
been omnipresent for some time, but the coming 
years will see a huge increase in the number of 
connected consumer devices. The penetration 
of existing devices (such as cars, fitness trackers, 
home assistants, smartphones, and smart watches) 
will continue to increase rapidly, joined by new, 
growing categories such as clothing, eyewear, home 
appliances, medical devices, and shoes. Experts 
estimate there will be up to one trillion connected 
devices by 2025.2 The resulting avalanche of new 
data created by these devices will allow carriers 
to understand their clients more deeply, resulting 
in new product categories, more personalized 
pricing, and increasingly real-time service delivery. For example, a wearable that is connected to an 
actuarial database could calculate a consumer’s 
personal risk score based on daily activities as well 
as the probability and severity of potential events.
Increased prevalence of physical robotics 
The field of robotics has seen many exciting 
achievements recently, and this innovation will 
continue to change how humans interact with 
the world around them. Additive manufacturing, 
also known as 3-D printing, will radically reshape 
manufacturing and the commercial insurance 
products of the future. By 2025, 3-D-printed 
buildings will be common, and carriers will 
need to assess how this development changes 
risk assessments. In addition, programmable, 
autonomous drones; autonomous farming 
equipment; and enhanced surgical robots will all be 
commercially viable in the next decade. By 2030, 
a much larger proportion of standard vehicles will Exhibit 1McK Insurance
AI Insurance
Exhibit 1 of 2
Arti/f_icial intelligence can deliver on industry expectations through machine learning and 
deep learning.
Source: Nvidia; Rockwell Anyoha, "The history of artificial intelligence," Science in the News, August 28, 2017, sitn.hms.harvard.edu1950s 1960sArti/f_icial intelligence
The science and engineering of making 
intelligent machinesMachine learning
A major approach to realizing arti/f_icial 
intelligenceDeep learning
A branch of machine learning
1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s
Arti/f_icial intelligence (AI)
Intelligence exhibited by machines, whereby 
machines mimic cognitive functions 
associated with human minds; cognitive 
functions include all aspects of learning, 
perceiving, problem solving, and reasoning.Machine learning (ML)
Major approach to realizing AI by learning 
from, and making data-driven predictions 
based on, data and learned experiences. ML 
comprises several categories, including 
reinforcement learning, supervised learning, 
and unsupervised learning.Deep learning (DL)
Branch of ML in which algorithms attempt 
to model high-level abstractions in data. DL 
connects arti/f_icial, software-based 
calculators that approximate the function of 
brain neurons. Neural networks, formed 
by these calculators, receive, analyze, and 
determine inputs and are informed if 
determination is correct.
3
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
have autonomous features, such as self-driving 
capabilities. Carriers will need to understand how 
the increasing presence of robotics in everyday life 
and across industries will shift risk pools, change 
customer expectations, and enable new products 
and channels.
Open-source and data ecosystems 
As data becomes ubiquitous, open-source 
protocols will emerge to ensure data can be 
shared and used across industries. Various public 
and private entities will come together to create 
ecosystems in order to share data for multiple 
use cases under a common regulatory and 
cybersecurity framework. For example, wearable 
data could be ported directly to insurance carriers, 
and connected-home and auto data could be made 
available through Amazon, Apple, Google, and a 
variety of consumer device manufacturers.
Advances in cognitive technologies 
Convolutional neural networks and other deep 
learning technologies currently used primarily for 
image, voice, and unstructured text processing 
will evolve to be applied in a wide variety of 
applications. These cognitive technologies, which 
are loosely based on the human brain’s ability to 
learn through decomposition and inference, will 
become the standard approach for processing the 
incredibly large and complex data streams that 
will be generated by “active” insurance products 
tied to an individual’s behavior and activities. 
With the increased commercialization of these 
types of technologies, carriers will have access to 
models that are constantly learning and adapting 
to the world around them—enabling new product 
categories and engagement techniques while 
responding to shifts in underlying risks or behaviors 
in real time.The state of insurance in 2030
AI and its related technologies will have a seismic 
impact on all aspects of the insurance industry, 
from distribution to underwriting and pricing to 
claims. Advanced technologies and data are already 
affecting distribution and underwriting, with policies 
being priced, purchased, and bound in near real 
time. An in-depth examination at what insurance 
may look like in 2030 highlights dramatic changes 
across the insurance value chain. 
Distribution
The experience of purchasing insurance is faster, 
with less active involvement on the part of the 
insurer and the customer.3 Enough information is 
known about individual behavior, with AI algorithms 
creating risk profiles, so that cycle times for 
completing the purchase of an auto, commercial, 
or life policy will be reduced to minutes or even 
seconds. Auto and home carriers have enabled 
instant quotes for some time but will continue to 
refine their ability to issue policies immediately 
to a wider range of customers as telematics and 
in-home Internet of Things (IoT) devices proliferate 
and pricing algorithms mature. Many life carriers 
are experimenting with simplified issue products, 
but most are restricted to only the healthiest 
applicants and are priced higher than a comparable 
fully underwritten product. As AI permeates life 
underwriting and carriers are able to identify risk  
in a much more granular and sophisticated way,  
we will see a new wave of mass-market instant  
issue products.
Smart contracts enabled by blockchain 
instantaneously authorize payments from a 
customer’s financial account. Meanwhile, contract 
processing and payment verification are eliminated 
or streamlined, reducing customer acquisition costs Experts estimate there will be up to one 
trillion connected devices by 2025.
3  Simon Kaesler, Matt Leo, Shannon Varney, and Kaitlyn Young, “How insurance can prepare for the next distribution model,” June 12, 2020, 
McKinsey.com.
4
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
4  Some insurtech companies are already designing  these types of products; Slice, for example, provides variable commercial insurance 
specifically tailored for home sharing.
5  Ramnath Balasubramanian, Ari Chester, and Nick Milinkovich, “Rewriting the rules: Digital and AI-powered underwriting in life insurance,”  
July 31, 2020, McKinsey.com.for insurers. The purchase of commercial insurance 
is similarly expedited as the combination of drones, 
IoT, and other available data provides sufficient 
information for AI-based cognitive models to 
proactively generate a bindable quote.
Highly dynamic, usage-based insurance (UBI) 
products proliferate and are tailored to the 
behavior of individual consumers. Insurance 
transitions from a “purchase and annual 
renewal” model to a continuous cycle, as product 
offerings constantly adapt to an individual’s 
behavioral patterns. Furthermore, products are 
disaggregated substantially into microcoverage 
elements (for example, phone battery insurance, 
flight delay insurance, different coverage for a 
washer and dryer within the home) that consumers 
can customize to their particular needs, with the 
ability to instantaneously compare prices from 
various carriers for their individualized baskets of 
insurance products. New products emerge to cover 
the shifting nature of living arrangements and 
travel. UBI becomes the norm as physical assets 
are shared across multiple parties, with a pay-by-
mile or pay-by-ride model for car sharing and pay-
by-stay insurance for home-sharing services, such 
as Airbnb.4
The role of insurance agents has changed 
dramatically by 2030. The number of agents is 
reduced substantially as active agents retire and 
remaining agents rely heavily on technology to 
increase productivity. The role of agents transitions 
to process facilitators and product educators. 
The agent of the future can sell nearly all types of 
coverage and adds value by helping clients manage 
their portfolios of coverage across experiences, 
health, life, mobility, personal property, and 
residential. Agents use smart personal assistants 
to optimize their tasks as well as AI-enabled bots 
to find potential deals for clients. These tools help 
agents to support a substantially larger client 
base while making customer interactions (a mix 
of in-person, virtual, and digital) shorter and more meaningful, given that each interaction will be 
tailored to the exact current and future needs of 
each individual client. 
Underwriting and pricing
In 2030, underwriting as we know it today ceases 
to exist for most personal and small-business 
products across life and property and casualty 
insurance.5 The process of underwriting is reduced 
to a few seconds as the majority of underwriting 
is automated and supported by a combination of 
machine and deep learning models built within 
the technology stack. These models are powered 
by internal data as well as a broad set of external 
data accessed through application programming 
interfaces and outside data and analytics providers. 
Information collected from devices provided by 
mainline carriers, reinsurers, product manufacturers, 
and product distributors is aggregated in a variety 
of data repositories and data streams. These 
information sources enable insurers to make ex 
ante decisions regarding underwriting and pricing, 
enabling proactive outreach with a bindable quote 
for a product bundle tailored to the buyer’s risk 
profile and coverage needs.
Regulators review AI-enabled, machine learning–
based models, a task that requires a transparent 
method for determining traceability of a score 
(similar to the rating factor derivations used today 
with regression-based coefficients). To verify 
that data usage is appropriate for marketing and 
underwriting, regulators assess a combination of 
model inputs. They also develop test policies for 
providers when determining rates in online plans 
to ensure the algorithm results are within approved 
bounds. Public policy considerations limit access 
to certain sensitive and predictive data (such as 
health and genetic information) that would decrease 
underwriting and pricing flexibility and increase 
antiselection risk in some segments.
Price remains central in consumer decision making, 
but carriers innovate to diminish competition purely 
5
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
on price. Sophisticated proprietary platforms 
connect customers and insurers and offer 
customers differentiated experiences, features, 
and value. In some segments, price competition 
intensifies, and razor-thin margins are the norm, 
while in other segments, unique insurance offerings 
enable margin expansion and differentiation. In 
jurisdictions where change is embraced, the pace 
of pricing innovation is rapid. Pricing is available in 
real time based on usage and a dynamic, data-rich 
assessment of risk, empowering consumers to 
make decisions about how their actions influence 
coverage, insurability, and pricing.
Claims
Claims processing in 2030 remains a primary 
function of carriers, but more than half of claims 
activities have been replaced by automation.6 
Advanced algorithms handle initial claims routing, 
increasing efficiency and accuracy. 
IoT sensors and an array of data-capture 
technologies, such as drones, largely replace 
traditional, manual methods of first notice of 
loss. Claims triage and repair services are often 
triggered automatically upon loss. In the case of 
an auto accident, for example, a policyholder takes 
streaming video of the damage, which is translated 
into loss descriptions and estimate amounts. 
Vehicles with autonomous features that sustain 
minor damage direct themselves to repair shops for 
service while another car with autonomous features 
is dispatched in the interim. In the home, IoT devices 
will be increasingly used to proactively monitor 
water levels, temperature, and other key risk factors 
and will proactively alert both tenants and insurers 
of issues before they arise.
Automated customer service apps handle most 
policyholder interactions through voice and text, 
directly following self-learning scripts that interface 
with the claims, fraud, medical service, policy, and 
repair systems. The turnaround time for resolution of many claims is measured in minutes rather 
than days or weeks. Human claims management 
focuses on a few areas: complex and unusual claims, 
contested claims where human interaction and 
negotiation are empowered by analytics and data-
driven insights, claims linked to systemic issues 
and risks created by new technology (for example, 
hackers infiltrate critical IoT systems), and random 
manual reviews of claims to ensure sufficient 
oversight of algorithmic decision making.
Claims organizations increase their focus on risk 
monitoring, prevention, and mitigation. IoT and new 
data sources are used to monitor risk and trigger 
interventions when factors exceed AI-defined 
thresholds. Customer interaction with insurance 
claims organizations focuses on avoiding potential 
loss. Individuals receive real-time alerts that 
may be linked with automatic interventions for 
inspection, maintenance, and repair. For large-scale 
catastrophe claims, insurers monitor homes and 
vehicles in real time using integrated IoT, telematics, 
and mobile phone data, assuming mobile phone 
service and power haven’t been disrupted in the 
area. When power goes out, insurers can prefile 
claims by using data aggregators, which consolidate 
data from satellites, networked drones, weather 
services, and policyholder data in real time. This 
system is pretested by the largest carriers across 
multiple catastrophe types, so highly accurate loss 
estimations are reliably filed in a real emergency. 
Detailed reports are automatically provided to 
reinsurers for faster reinsurance capital flow.
6  Andy Fong, Kristen Ganjani, Elixabete Larrea, and José Miguel Novo Sánchez, “Claims 2030: A talent strategy for the future of insurance 
claims,” December 10, 2020, McKinsey.com.
6
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
Exhibit 2 How insurers can prepare for 
accelerating changes
The rapid evolution of the industry will be fueled 
by the extensive adoption and integration of 
automation, deep learning, and external data 
ecosystems. While no one can predict exactly what 
insurance might look like in 2030, carriers can take 
several steps now to prepare for change.
1. Get smart on AI-related technologies  
and trends
Although the tectonic shifts in the industry will be 
tech-focused, addressing them is not the domain 
of the IT team. Instead, board members and 
customer-experience teams should invest the time 
and resources to build a deep understanding of 
these AI-related technologies. Part of this effort 
will require exploring hypothesis-driven scenarios 
in order to understand and highlight where and 
when disruption might occur—and what it means 
for certain business lines. For example, insurers are 
unlikely to gain much insights from limited-scale 
IoT pilot projects in discrete parts of the business. 
Instead, they must proceed with purpose and an 
understanding of how their organization might 
participate in the IoT ecosystem at scale. Pilots 
and proof-of-concept (POC) projects should be 
designed to test not just how a technology works 
but also how successful the carrier might be 
operating in a particular role within a data- or IoT-
based ecosystem.
2. Develop and begin implementation of a 
coherent strategic plan
Building on the insights from AI explorations, 
carriers must decide how to use technology 
to support their business strategy. The senior 
leadership team’s long-term strategic plan will 
require a multiyear transformation that touches 
operations, talent, and technology. Some carriers 
are already beginning to take innovative approaches 
such as starting their own venture-capital arms, 
acquiring promising insurtech companies, and 
forging partnerships with leading academic institutions. Insurers should develop a perspective 
on areas they want to invest in to meet or beat the 
market and what strategic approach—for example, 
forming a new entity or building in-house strategic 
capabilities—is best suited for their organization.
This plan should address all four dimensions involved 
in any large-scale, analytics-based initiative—
everything from data to people to culture (Exhibit 2). 
The plan should outline a road map of AI-based pilots 
and POCs and detail which parts of the organization 
will require investments in skill building or focused 
change management. Most important, a detailed 
schedule of milestones and checkpoints is essential 
to allow the organization to determine, on a regular 
basis, how the plan should be modified to address 
any shifts in the evolution of AI technologies and 
significant changes or disruptions within the industry.
In addition to being able to understand and 
implement AI technologies, carriers also need to 
develop strategic responses to coming macrolevel Article type and Year
Article Title
Exhibit X of X
There are four core elements in 
de/f_ining a successful AI strategy.
Models 
and toolsChange 
managementOrganization 
and talent
CultureData 
capabilitiesAnalytics strategy
7
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
changes. As many lines shift toward a “predict and 
prevent” methodology, carriers will need to rethink 
their customer engagement and branding, product 
design, and core earnings. Auto accidents will be 
reduced through use of vehicles with self-driving 
capabilities, in-home flooding will be prevented by 
IoT devices, buildings will be reprinted after a natural 
disaster, and lives will be saved and extended 
by improved healthcare. Likewise, vehicles will 
still break down, natural disasters will continue 
to devastate coastal regions, and individuals will 
require effective medical care and support when a 
loved one passes. As these changes take root, profit 
pools will shift, new types and lines of products 
will emerge, and how consumers interact with their 
insurers will change substantially. 
Winning carriers of the future will create and enact 
strategic plans that position their brand, products, 
customer interactions, and technology successfully 
to take advantage of the new economic structure on 
the horizon.
All of these efforts can produce a coherent analytics 
and technology strategy that addresses all aspects 
of the business, with a keen eye on both value 
creation and differentiation.
3. Create and execute a comprehensive  
data strategy
Data is fast becoming one of the most—if not the 
most—valuable asset for any organization. The 
insurance industry is no different: how carriers 
identify, quantify, place, and manage risk is all 
predicated on the volume and quality of data 
they acquire during a policy’s life cycle. Most AI 
technologies will perform best when they have a 
high volume of data from a variety of sources. As 
such, carriers must develop a well-structured and 
actionable strategy with regard to both internal 
and external data. Internal data will need to be 
organized in ways that enable and support the agile development of new analytics insights and 
capabilities. With external data, carriers must 
focus on securing access to data that enriches 
and complements their internal data sets. The real 
challenge will be gaining access in a cost-efficient 
way. As the external data ecosystem continues 
to expand, it will likely remain highly fragmented, 
making it quite difficult to identify high-quality data 
at a reasonable cost. Overall, data strategy will need 
to include a variety of ways to obtain and secure 
access to external data, as well as ways to combine 
this data with internal sources. Carriers should 
be prepared to have a multifaceted procurement 
strategy that could include the direct acquisition of 
data assets and providers, licensing of data sources, 
use of data APIs, and partnerships with data brokers.
4. Create the right talent and technology 
infrastructure
In augmented chess, average players enabled by AI 
tend to do better than expert chess players enabled 
by the same AI. The underlying reason for this 
counterintuitive outcome depends on whether the 
individual interacting with AI embraces, trusts, and 
understands the supporting technology. To ensure 
that every part of the organization views advanced 
analytics as a must-have capability, carriers must 
make measured but sustained investments in 
people. The insurance organization of the future will 
require talent with the right mindsets and skills.7 The 
next generation of successful frontline insurance 
workers will be in increasingly high demand and 
must possess a unique mix of being technologically 
adept, creative, and willing to work at something 
that will not be a static process but rather a mix of 
semiautomated and machine-supported tasks that 
continually evolve. Generating value from the AI use 
cases of the future will require carriers to integrate 
skills, technology, and insights from around the 
organization to deliver unique, holistic customer 
experiences. Doing so will require a conscious 
culture shift for most carriers that will rely on buy-in 
7  Julie Goran, Krish Krishnakanthan, Eleonora Sharef, and Kurt Strovink, “How US insurers can build a winning digital workforce for the future,” 
September 9, 2020, McKinsey.com.
8
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
and leadership from the executive suite. Developing 
an aggressive strategy to attract, cultivate, and 
retain a variety of workers with critical skill sets will 
be essential to keep pace. These roles will include 
data engineers, data scientists, technologists, cloud 
computing specialists, and experience designers. To 
retain knowledge while also ensuring the business 
has the new skills and capabilities necessary to 
compete, many organizations will design and 
implement reskilling programs. As a last component 
of developing the new workforce, organizations 
will identify external resources and partners to 
augment in-house capabilities that will help carriers 
secure the needed support for business evolution 
and execution. The IT architecture of the future will 
also be radically different from today’s. Carriers 
should start making targeted investments to enable 
the migration to a more future-forward technology 
stack that can support a two-speed IT architecture.8Rapid advances in technologies in the next decade 
will lead to disruptive changes in the insurance 
industry. The winners in AI-based insurance will 
be carriers that use new technologies to create 
innovative products, harness cognitive learning 
insights from new data sources, streamline 
processes and lower costs, and exceed customer 
expectations for individualization and dynamic 
adaptation. Most important, carriers that adopt a 
mindset focused on creating opportunities from 
disruptive technologies—instead of viewing them as 
a threat to their current business—will thrive in the 
insurance industry in 2030.
8  Driek Desmet, Markus Löffler, and Allen Weinberg , “Modernizing IT for a digital era,” September 1,  2016, McKinsey.com .
Copyright © 20 21 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.Ramnath Balasubramanian  and Ari Libarikian  are senior partners in McKinsey’s New York office, and Doug McElhaney  is a 
partner in the Washington, DC, office.
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Gijs Biermans, Bayard Gennert, Nick Milinkovich, and Erik Summers.
9
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance
Contact
To connect with someone on this topic in your region, please contact: 
Americas
Ramnath Balasubramanian
Senior partner, New York
Ramnath_Balasubramanian@McKinsey.com
João Bueno
Senior partner, São Paulo
Joao_Bueno@McKinsey.com
Ari Libarikian 
Senior partner, New York
Ari_Libarikian@McKinsey.com
Doug McElhaney
Partner, Washington DC
Doug_McElhaney@McKinsey.com
Salomon Spak
Partner, Lima
Salomon_Spak@McKinsey.comEurope
Elena Pizzocaro
Partner, Milan
Elena_Pizzocaro@McKinsey.com
Khaled Rifai
Partner, Berlin
Khaled_Rifai@McKinsey.com
Asia
Suho Kim
Partner, Seoul
Suho_Kim@McKinsey.com 
Further insights
McKinsey’s Insurance Practice publishes on issues of interest to industry executives. 
Our recent articles include:
Rewriting the rules: Digital and AI-powered 
underwriting in life insurance
How US insurers can build a winning digital 
workforce for the future
Claims 2030: A talent strategy for the future of 
insurance claims
Future of insurance: Unleashing growth through 
new business building
10
Insurance 2030—The impact of AI on the future of insurance