Citation: Kaushik, K.; Bhardwaj, A.;
Dwivedi, A.D.; Singh, R. Machine
Learning-Based Regression
Framework to Predict Health
Insurance Premiums. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph19137898
Academic Editor: Joan Costa-Font
Received: 18 May 2022
Accepted: 27 June 2022
Published: 28 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
Machine Learning-Based Regression Framework to Predict
Health Insurance Premiums
Keshav Kaushik1
, Akashdeep Bhardwaj1
, Ashutosh Dhar Dwivedi2,*
and Rajani Singh2
1School of Computer Science, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun 248007, India;
ofﬁcialkeshavkaushik@gmail.com (K.K.); bhrdwh@yahoo.com (A.B.)
2Centre for Business Data Analytics, Department of Digitalization, Copenhagen Business School,
2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark; rs.digi@cbs.dk
*Correspondence: ashudhar7@gmail.com or add.digi@cbs.dk
Abstract: Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in healthcare are approaches to
make people’s lives easier by anticipating and diagnosing diseases more swiftly than most medical
experts. There is a direct link between the insurer and the policyholder when the distance between
an insurance business and the consumer is reduced to zero with the use of technology, especially
digital health insurance. In comparison with traditional insurance, AI and machine learning have
altered the way insurers create health insurance policies and helped consumers receive services faster.
Insurance businesses use ML to provide clients with accurate, quick, and efﬁcient health insurance
coverage. This research trained and evaluated an artiﬁcial intelligence network-based regression-
based model to predict health insurance premiums. The authors predicted the health insurance cost
incurred by individuals on the basis of their features. On the basis of various parameters, such as
age, gender, body mass index, number of children, smoking habits, and geolocation, an artiﬁcial
neural network model was trained and evaluated. The experimental results displayed an accuracy of
92.72%, and the authors analyzed the model’s performance using key performance metrics.
Keywords: artiﬁcial intelligence; neural networks; machine learning; health insurance; prediction
1. Introduction
We live in a world that is ﬁlled with dangers and uncertainties. People, homes,
businesses, buildings, and property are all vulnerable to various types of risk, and these
risks might differ. These threats include the risk of death, illness, and the loss of property
or possessions. People’s lives revolve around their health and happiness. However,
because risks cannot always be avoided, the ﬁnancial sector has devised a number of
products to protect individuals and organisations from them by utilizing ﬁnancial resources
to compensate them. As a result, insurance is a policy that reduces or eliminates the
expenses of various risks. A policy that protects medical bills is known as health insurance.
An individual who has purchased a health insurance policy receives coverage after paying
a certain premium. The cost of health insurance is determined by a variety of factors.
The cost of a health insurance policy premium varies from person to person since various
factors inﬂuence the cost of a health insurance plan. Consider age: a young individual
is far less likely than an older person to suffer serious health issues. As a result, treating
an elderly person is more expensive than treating a young one. As a result, an older
individual must pay a higher premium than a younger person. Because [ 1] numerous
factors inﬂuence the insurance premium of a health insurance policy, the premium amount
varies from person to person.
In healthcare, artiﬁcial intelligence is capable of completing many medical-related
activities at a much quicker rate in order to forecast or diagnose illnesses/injuries effec-
tively and deliver the best medical therapy to the patient. AI may gather data, process
it, and offer the appropriate result to the user. This reduces the time it takes to detect
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19137898 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 2 of 15
diseases and mistakes, allowing the diagnosis–treatment–recovery cycle to be dramatically
shortened. For example, if you choose an online consultation with a doctor, chatbots
are used by healthcare professionals or organisations to obtain basic information prior to
an appointment with the doctor. This assists the doctor in comprehending the problem
before beginning the consultation procedure. As a result, both the doctor and the patient
save time.
AI and ML play various roles in the health insurance market, some of which are
listed below:
• The use of chatbots has become an increasingly important aspect of any ﬁrm; even
healthcare organisations are embracing the technology. Because almost everyone has
access to the Internet and a smartphone, interacting with physicians, hospitals, and
insurance companies is much easier using chat applications. They are available 24 h
a day, seven days a week, making them more effective than human interaction. They
employ emotional analysis and natural language processing to better comprehend
consumers’ requests and respond to a variety of queries about insurance claims and
product choices.
• Faster Claim Settlements: The time it takes for health insurance claims to be settled is
one of the main difﬁculties for both policyholders and insurers. This might be due to
lengthy manual processes or bogus claims. It takes time and effort to manually identify
valid claims. However, AI has the potential to signiﬁcantly lower claim processing
times in the future. AI can detect fraudulent claims and learn from previous data to
improve efﬁciency signiﬁcantly.
• Personalised Health Insurance Policies: On the basis of an individual’s past data and
current health circumstances, insurers can identify and develop a health insurance
plan for them. This assists the insurer in providing a proper health insurance plan
rather than a health insurance package that clients may or may not utilise efﬁciently.
Customers will also be urged to select a plan that meets their requirements rather than
paying for services they may not use.
• Cost-effectiveness: Insurers are utilising AI to recommend good habits and behaviours
to clients, such as exercise and diet, lowering the cost of avoidable healthcare expendi-
tures caused by bad habits.
• Fraud Detection: Researchers are working on building machines that can evaluate
health insurance claims and anticipate fraud. This also aids insurers in resolving
legitimate claims more quickly.
• Faster Underwriting: The health insurance underwriting procedure is lengthy and
time-consuming. Fitness trackers, for example, can now collect and analyse vast
amounts of data and share it with insurance companies thanks to technological break-
throughs, such as smart wearable technologies. Insurers can ﬁnd innovative methods
to underwrite consumers differently by employing these data. By adopting AI-based
predictive analysis, health insurance ﬁrms may save time and money.
Even as the healthcare business quickly digitises, enormous amounts of data will
inevitably be created and gathered. This will simply increase the workload for healthcare
providers since more raw data means more effort. For healthcare professionals and patients,
AI can interpret these data and deliver insights based on them. It is a more efﬁcient way to
diagnose ailments. Some of the advantages of AI and ML in healthcare are:
• Clinical Observation-Based Decisions: AI and machine learning can process vast
volumes of data in real time and give critical information that can aid in patient di-
agnosis and treatment recommendations. This translates to improved healthcare
services at a reduced cost by evaluating patient data and delivering ﬁndings in
a couple of minutes. Diabetes or blood sugar devices, for example, may analyse
data rather than merely reading raw data and alert you to patterns depending on the
information presented, allowing you to take immediate or corrective action.
• Increased Accessibility: While afﬂuent countries can offer healthcare to the majority of
their citizens, underdeveloped countries may struggle. This is owing to a technological
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 3 of 15
gap in healthcare, which results in a drop in the respective country’s health index.
Reaching out to individuals in the farthest reaches of the globe is an important task, and
the risk of healthcare deprivation is growing. By establishing an efﬁcient healthcare
system, AI can assist to alleviate this problem. Digital healthcare will help bridge the
gap between poor and wealthy countries by allowing people to better understand
their symptoms and obtain treatment as soon as possible.
• Helps Reveal Early Illness Risks: AI can evaluate enormous amounts of patient medical
data and compile it all in one location, which can help reveal early illness risks. It
may examine prior and current health issues using the information. Doctors may
compare the data and make an accurate diagnosis, allowing them to deliver the best
therapy possible. With a large amount of data in one location, AI-powered healthcare
applications can assess a wide range of symptoms, diagnose ailments, and potentially
forecast future illnesses.
• Early Detection of Illness: Artiﬁcial intelligence can learn from data, such as diagnoses,
medical reports, and photographs. This helps detect the beginning of ailments over
time as well as implement preventative and mitigation measures.
• Artiﬁcial intelligence also saves time and money by reducing the time and effort
required to evaluate and diagnose an ailment. Instead of waiting for a doctor’s
consultation to diagnose your sickness, AI will be able to analyse and offer correct
inputs to the doctor, allowing the doctor to make the best decision possible and
minimising the time it takes to deliver early treatment. People may not need to visit
many laboratories for diagnosis if AI can read and evaluate the condition.
• Expediting Processes: By streamlining visits, interpreting clinical notes, and record-
ing patient notes and treatment plans, AI can assist clinicians in decreasing their
administrative load. The beneﬁts of AI in healthcare are numerous since it simpliﬁes
operations and offers reliable data in less time.
• Improve Drug Development: Drug development can take a long time and sometimes
miss deadlines for pharmaceutical companies to deliver the proper formula. On the
other hand, drug development has never been faster than it is now, thanks to AI. AI
allows scientists to concentrate on creating treatments that are both promising and
relevant to the needs of patients. It saves time and money when creating medications
that might save lives in an emergency.
When it comes to evaluating data, healthcare in India is incredibly complicated and
difﬁcult to grasp, and patients often suffer the price. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in healthcare
can boost efﬁciency and treatment effectiveness. It can also assist healthcare personnel in
spending more time delivering appropriate treatment, lowering burnout among medical
experts. Here are a few examples of how AI affect healthcare:
• In undeveloped or neglected nations, healthcare access is limited.
• Electronic health records are less burdensome.
• Antibiotic resistance threats are being reduced.
• Insurance claims are processed faster.
• Plans for individual health insurance.
The highlights of this research are:
• This domain of insurance prediction is not fully explored and requires thorough
research. From the proposed machine learning model, patients, hospitals, physi-
cians, and insurance providers could beneﬁt and accomplish their tasks faster and
more efﬁciently.
• The authors trained an ANN-based regression model to predict health insurance premiums.
• The model was evaluated against key performance metrics, such as RMSE ,MSE ,MAE ,
r2, and adjusted r2.
• The overall accuracy of the proposed model was 92.72%.
• The correlation matrix was plotted to visualise the relationship between various factors
with the charges.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 4 of 15
This paper is organised as follows: Section 1 starts with the introduction to the topic
and concept; this section highlights the latest related work in this domain. Section 3
discusses the working methodology followed in the implementation, and Section 4 shows
the results and discussion. Finally, Section 5 contains the conclusion of the entire paper.
2. Related Work
The authors identiﬁed 245 published research papers from 2017 to the present date
from IEEE, ACM, Inderscience, Elsevier, and other highly referenced journals. On the basis
of similar research using artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning models to predict the
health insurance premium amounts for subscribers, the authors divided and classiﬁed
these publications with a four-stage selection method. The literature survey for all the
selected papers and the categorisation breakdown are illustrated in Table 1.
Table 1. Research literature classiﬁcation.
Literature Classiﬁcation Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Breakdown
Health insurance prediction 54 38 23 10 22.04%
Premium calculation 53 37 22 10 21.63%
Machine learning 77 54 32 15 31.43%
Artiﬁcial intelligence 61 43 26 12 24.90%
Neural networks 245 172 103 46
This helped to shortlist 46 papers that were closely matched and relevant research, as
illustrated in Figure 1.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16 
 
• The authors trained an ANN-based regression model to predict health insurance pre-
miums. 
• The model was evaluated against ke y performance metrics, such as RMSE , MSE , 
MAE , r2, and adjusted r2. 
• The overall accuracy of the proposed model was 92.72%. 
• The correlation matrix was plotted to visualise the relationship between various fac-
tors with the charges. 
This paper is organised as follows: Section 1 starts with the introduction to the topic 
and concept; this section highlights the latest  related work in this domain. Section 3 dis-
cusses the working methodology followed in the implementation, and Section 4 shows 
the results and discussion. Fina lly, Section 5 contains the conclusion of the entire paper.  
2. Related Work 
The authors identified 245 published research  papers from 2017 to the present date 
from IEEE, ACM, Inderscience, Elsevier, and other highly referenced journals. On the ba-
sis of similar research using artificial intelligence and machine learning models to predict 
the health insurance premium am ounts for subscribers, the au thors divided and classified 
these publications with a four-stage selection method. The literature survey for all the 
selected papers and the categorisation breakdown are illustrated in Table 1. 
Table 1. Research literature classification. 
Literature Classification Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Breakdown 
Health insurance prediction 54 38 23 10 22.04% 
Premium calculation 53 37 22 10 21.63% 
Machine learning 77 54 32 15 31.43% 
Artificial intelligence 61 43 26 12 24.90% 
Neural networks 245 172 103 46  
This helped to shortlist 46 papers that were closely matched and relevant research, 
as illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Research papers selection process. 
In the healthcare business, predicting health insurance premiums using machine 
learning (ML) algorithms is still a subject that has to be investigated and improved. The work of [2] presented a computational intelli gence technique for es timating healthcare 
insurance expenditures using a set of machin e learning techniques . One essay [3] began 
by looking at the potential ramifications of using predictive algorithms to calculate insur-
ance prices. Would this jeopardise the idea of  risk mutualisation, resulting in new kinds Stage 1
•Identified 245 research 
papers since 2018 from IEEE, ACM, InterSience, Elsevier, and othersStage 2
•Included only matching, 
and relevant research papers from keywords, model and accuracy resultsStage 3
•Excluded 
duplicate works based on review work and titleStage 4
•Finalized and 
shortlisted 46 closely matched and relevant research papers  
Figure 1. Research papers selection process.
In the healthcare business, predicting health insurance premiums using machine
learning (ML) algorithms is still a subject that has to be investigated and improved. The
work of [ 2] presented a computational intelligence technique for estimating healthcare
insurance expenditures using a set of machine learning techniques. One essay [ 3] began by
looking at the potential ramiﬁcations of using predictive algorithms to calculate insurance
prices. Would this jeopardise the idea of risk mutualisation, resulting in new kinds of
prejudice and insurance exclusion? In the second stage, the authors looked at how the
connection between the company and the insured was altered when the customer realised
that the ﬁrm had a lot of data about her actual behaviour that was constantly updated.
The goal of the study proposed by van den Broek-Altenburg and Atherly [ 4] was to
ﬁnd out what customers think about medical insurance by looking at what they talk about
on Twitter. The goal was to utilise sentiment classiﬁcation to ﬁnd out how people feel
about health insurance and doctors. During the 2016–2017 healthcare insurance registration
period in the United States, the authors utilised an Application Program Interface (API) to
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 5 of 15
collect tweets on Twitter with the phrases “health insurance” or “health plan”. A policy that
decreases or negates the costs of losses caused by different hazards is known as insurance.
Several [ 5] variables impact the cost of insurance. These elements have an impact on the
development of insurance plans. Machine learning (ML) can help the insurance industry
enhance the efﬁciency of policy wording.
An article by Nidhi Bhardwaj and Rishabh Anand [ 6] used individuals’ health data
to forecast their insurance premiums. To assess and evaluate the performance of various
algorithms, regression was utilised. The dataset was used to train the models, and the
results of that training were utilised to make predictions. The model was then tested
and veriﬁed by comparing the anticipated quantity to the actual data. The accuracy
of these models was later compared. Multiple linear regression and gradient boosting
algorithms outperformed linear regression and decision trees, according to the ﬁndings.
Gradient boosting was suitable in this scenario since it required far less computing time to
attain the same performance measure, although its performance was equivalent to that of
multiple regression.
In the life insurance sector, risk assessment is critical for classifying applicants. Com-
panies utilise screening methodology to produce application decisions and determine the
pricing of insurance products. The vetting process may be computerised to speed up appli-
cations or programs thanks to the expansion of data and advances in business intelligence.
The goal of the study in [ 7] was to ﬁnd ways to use predictive analytics to improve risk
assessment for life insurance companies. The research was conducted using a real-world
dataset with over a hundred characteristics (anonymised). Dimensionality reduction was
performed to choose salient features that could increase the models’ prediction potential.
Actuaries utilise a variety of numerical procedures to forecast yearly medical claims
expenditure in an insurance business. This sum must be accounted for in the annual
ﬁnancial budgets. Inaccurate estimation usually has a detrimental impact on a company’s
overall success. Goundar et al. [ 8] explained how to build an artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) that can predict yearly medical claims. The aim was to lower the mean absolute
percentage error by changing factors of the conﬁguration, such as the epoch, learning rate,
and neurons, in various layers once the neural network models were constructed. Feed
forward and recurrent neural networks were utilised to forecast the yearly claim amounts.
Joseph Ejiyi et al. [ 9] investigated an insurance dataset from the Zindi Africa com-
petition, which was stated to be from Olusola Insurance Company in Lagos, Nigeria, to
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of each of the ML algorithms we employed here. The results
showed that, according to a dataset obtained from Zindi, insurance authorities, sharehold-
ers, administration, ﬁnance professionals, banks, accountants, insurers, and customers
all expressed worry about insurance company insolvency. This worry stemmed from
a perceived requirement to shield the general public from the repercussions of insurer
insolvencies while also lowering management and auditing duties. In this work [ 10], we
offer a strategy for preventing insurance company insolvency. In the past, insolvency
prediction approaches, such as multiple regression, logit analysis, recursive partitioning
algorithm, and others were applied.
Fauzan and Murﬁ [ 11] used XGBoost to solve the issue of claim prediction and evaluate
its accuracy. We also compared XGBoost’s performance against that of other ensemble
learning methods, such as AdaBoost, Stochastic GB, Random Forest, and Neural Network,
as well as online learning methods. In terms of normalised Gini, our simulations suggest
that XGBoost outperforms other techniques. People are increasingly investing in such
insurance, allowing con artists to defraud them. Insurance fraud is a crime that can be
committed by either the customer or the insurance contract’s vendor. Unrealistic claims
and post-dated policies, among other things, are examples of client-side insurance fraud.
Insurance fraud occurs on the vendor side in the implementation of regulations from
non-existent ﬁrms and failure to submit premiums, among other things. In this study [ 12],
we compare and contrast several categorisation methods.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 6 of 15
Kumar Sharma and Sharma [ 13] aimed to develop mathematical models for predicting
future premiums and validating the ﬁndings using regression models. To anticipate
policyholders’ choice to lapse life insurance contracts, we employed the random forest
approach. Even when factoring in feature interactions, the technique beats the logistic
model. Azzone et al. [ 14] studied how the model works; we employed global and local
classiﬁcation tools. The ﬁndings suggest that existing models, such as the logistic regression
model, are unable to account for the variety of ﬁnancial decisions.
Understanding [ 15] the elements that inﬂuence a user’s health insurance premium
is critical for insurance ﬁrms to generate proper charges. Premium should always be
a user’s ﬁrst concern when making suitable selections. The majority of characteristics
that contribute to the cost of health care premiums are BMI, smoking status, age, and
kids, according to the output, which revealed that these four parameters have a strong
correlating effect on health insurance rates.
Premiums are determined by health insurance companies’ private statistical proce-
dures and complicated models, which are kept concealed from the public. The goal of this
study [ 16] is to see if machine learning algorithms can be used to anticipate the pricing
of yearly health insurance premiums on the basis of contract parameters and business
characteristics. The goal of this article [ 17] is to use a strong machine learning model
to estimate the future medical costs of patients on the basis of speciﬁc parameters. Us-
ing the simulation results, the elements that inﬂuence individuals’ medical expenditures
were determined.
The Japanese government has mandated that insurers develop a population health
management strategy. To assess the strategy [ 18], a cost estimate is required. A standard
linear model is not suited for the prediction since one insured patient might have several
conditions. Using a quantitative machine learning technique, we created a medical cost
forecasting model. The historical uniformity of health care expenses in a major state
Medicaid programme was investigated in this research. The expenses were forecasted
using predictive machine learning algorithms, particularly for high-cost, high-need (HCHN)
patients. The ﬁndings of Yang et al. [ 19] indicated a high temporal link and showed potential
for utilising machine learning to forecast future health care spending. HCHN patients had
a stronger temporal association, and their expenditures may be anticipated more accurately.
Including additional historical eras improved forecasting accuracy.
Some individuals who are economically disadvantaged will be unable to cover
treatment-related fees.
According to our behaviour and genetics, the necessity for health insurance varies as
we grow older. Health insurance is becoming increasingly important as people’s lifestyles
and ailments change. Because a medical problem can strike anybody at any moment and
have such a signiﬁcant psychological and economic impact on the individual, it is difﬁcult
to predict when one will occur. With this background in mind, this research [ 20] aimed to
forecast the cost of health insurance using the following contributions: age, gender, region,
smoking, BMI, and children.
The K-means algorithm [ 21] and the Elbow technique were used in this study to
properly arrange people into an appropriate number of clusters on the basis of similarities.
On the basis of this analysis, the health insurance premium quotation was predicted for each
group of people using the speciﬁed criteria. Predicting the cost of people’s health insurance
is a valuable way to increase healthcare accountability. In order to forecast insurance
premiums for people in this research [ 22], Sailaja et al. employed several regression models
to assess personal health information. A lot of things impact the cost of insurance rates.
The use of a Stacking Regression model to anticipate insurance prices for people might
help health insurers. Dutta et al. [ 23] estimated the cost of health insurance that the patient
was responsible for paying. To accomplish the best prediction analysis, several data mining
regression methods, such as decision tree, random forest, polynomial regression, and linear
regression, were used. A study of the actual and expected expenditures of the prediction
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 7 of 15
premium was made, and a graph was displayed as a result, allowing us to select the
best-suited regression technique for insurance policy forecasting.
3. Research Methodology
In this paper, the authors used the Python programming language for the implemen-
tation and trained the machine learning-based model for the prediction of health insurance
premiums. Initially, the dataset and the necessary python libraries and packages were
imported. The dataset consisted of over 1300 entries and seven columns, namely charges,
smoking, region, children, BMI, sex, and age. This dataset was used to predict the health
insurance premium. Thereafter, an exploratory data analysis was performed. In this step,
the dataset was checked for null values. Since there were no null values in the dataset,
the statistical summary of the dataset was analysed. The statistical summary included
the count, mean, standard deviation, and various other statistics related to the columns
available in the dataset—age, BMI, number of children, and health insurance charges. The
dataset link is given at the end of the paper in the Data Availability Statement. The entire
methodology followed in this paper is shown in Figure 2.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
insurance is a valuable way to increase healthcare accountability. In order to forecast in-
surance premiums for people in this research [22], Sailaja et al. employed several regres-
sion models to assess personal health information. A lot of things impact the cost of insur-ance rates. The use of a Stacking Regression model to anticipate insurance prices for peo-
ple might help health insurers. Dutta et al. [23]  estimated the cost of health insurance that 
the patient was responsible for paying. To acco mplish the best prediction analysis, several 
data mining regression methods, such as dec ision tree, random forest, polynomial regres-
sion, and linear regression, were used. A study of the actual and expected expenditures of the prediction premium was made, and a grap h was displayed as a result, allowing us 
to select the best-suited regression technique for insurance policy forecasting. 
3. Research Methodology 
In this paper, the authors used the Pytho n programming language for the implemen-
tation and trained the machine learning-bas ed model for the prediction of health insur-
ance premiums. Initially, the dataset and th e necessary python libraries and packages 
were imported. The dataset consisted of over 1300 entries and seven columns, namely 
charges, smoking, region, children, BMI, sex, and age. This dataset was used to predict the health insurance premium. Thereafter, an exploratory data analysis was performed. 
In this step, the dataset was checked for null va lues. Since there were no null values in the 
dataset, the statistical summary of the dataset was analysed. The statistical summary in-
cluded the count, mean, standard deviation, and various other statistics related to the col-
umns available in the dataset—age, BMI, number of children, and health insurance 
charges. The dataset link is given at the end of the paper in the Data Availability State-
ment. The entire methodology followed in this paper is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Machine learning-based regression framework. 
3.1. Step 1: Performing the Data  Analysis and Feature Engineering 
In this step, the dataset was analysed to check the relationship between the various 
columns. As shown in Table 2, it was observed that the southeast region had the highest 
charges and body mass index. The dataset was grouped by age, and then the relationship 
between age and charges was analysed. 
Table 2. Relationship between the region and charges. 
Region  Age BMI Children Charges 
Northeast 39.268519 29.173503 1.046296 13,406.384516 
Northwes t 39.196923 29.199785 1.147692 12 ,417.575374 
Southeast 38.939560 33.355989 1.049451 14,735.411438 
Southwest 39.455385 30.596615 1.141538 12,346.937377 
In this step, the unique values in the sex,  smoking, and region columns were checked, 
and the categorical variables were converted to numerical variables. 
Figure 2. Machine learning-based regression framework.
3.1. Step 1: Performing the Data Analysis and Feature Engineering
In this step, the dataset was analysed to check the relationship between the various
columns. As shown in Table 2, it was observed that the southeast region had the highest
charges and body mass index. The dataset was grouped by age, and then the relationship
between age and charges was analysed.
Table 2. Relationship between the region and charges.
Region Age BMI Children Charges
Northeast 39.268519 29.173503 1.046296 13,406.384516
Northwest 39.196923 29.199785 1.147692 12,417.575374
Southeast 38.939560 33.355989 1.049451 14,735.411438
Southwest 39.455385 30.596615 1.141538 12,346.937377
In this step, the unique values in the sex, smoking, and region columns were checked,
and the categorical variables were converted to numerical variables.
3.2. Step 2: Data Visualisation
In the previous step, the dataset was cleaned so that the model could be trained and
visualised. In this step, the data was visualised to obtain useful information. In Figure 3,
the histogram is plotted for all the columns present in the dataset for a visual glimpse.
After that, the pairplot diagram was plotted, as illustrated in Figure 4. Pairplot
diagrams are used to ﬁgure out which attributes best explain the connection between
two variables or form the most separated groups. Drawing basic lines or making a linear
distinction in our dataset also aided in the formation of some simple categorisation models.
The pairplot diagram showed the relationship between the various columns present
in the dataset. A pairplot is a grid that shows all the different scatter plots with all the
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 8 of 15
different combinations in our data. After plotting the pairplot diagram, the regplot was
plotted, as shown in Figure 5. We can see that as age increased, charges tended to increase
as well. Therefore, there is a linear relationship between the charges and age.
Regplot is a programme that plots data and ﬁts a linear regression model. To evaluate
the regression model, there are several mutually incompatible alternatives. In Figure 6,
there is a straight line that passes through the data, and it seems that body mass index (BMI)
tends to increase a little bit. It is possible that the charges also tend to increase slightly.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
3.2. Step 2: Data Visualisation 
In the previous step, the dataset was cleaned so that the model could be trained and 
visualised. In this step, the da ta was visualised to obtain useful information. In Figure 3, 
the histogram is plotted for all the columns pr esent in the dataset fo r a visual glimpse. 
 
Figure 3. Histogram plots for columns. 
After that, the pairplot diagram was plotted, as illustrated in Figure 4. Pairplot dia-
grams are used to figure out which attribut es best explain the connection between two 
variables or form the most separated groups. Drawing basic lines or making a linear dis-
tinction in our dataset also aided in the formation of some simple categorisation models. 
Figure 3. Histogram plots for columns.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 9 of 15
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 
Figure 4. Pairplot diagram of entire dataset. 
The pairplot diagram showed the relationsh ip between the various columns present 
in the dataset. A pairplot is a grid that shows all the different scatter plots with all the 
different combinations in our data. After plo tting the pairplot diagram, the regplot was 
plotted, as shown in Figure 5. We can see that  as age increased, charges tended to increase 
as well. Therefore, there is a linear re lationship between the charges and age. 
Figure 4. Pairplot diagram of entire dataset.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
Figure 5. Regplot of charges vs. age. 
Regplot is a programme that plots data and fits a linear regression model. To evaluate 
the regression model, there are several mutually  incompatible alternatives. In Figure 6, 
there is a straight line that passes through the data, and it seems that body mass index 
(BMI) tends to increase a little bit. It is possible that the charges also tend to increase slightly. 
 
Figure 6. Regplot of charges vs. BMI. 
3.3. Step 3: Training and Evalua ting a Linear Regression Model 
In this step, the authors trained the linear regression model, but before training the 
model, the dataset was cleaned. Only the numerical values were taken, and the data were 
scaled. A standard scaler was used to scale the data. Scaling the data is important before 
feeding the data to the model. Once the data was scaled completely, the linear regression 
model was trained. The accuracy of the linear regression model came out to be 75.09%. 
After that, the linear regression model was evaluated by  finding the Root Mean Square 
Error ( RMSE ), Mean Squared Error ( MSE ), Mean Absolute Error ( MAE ), and adjusted r2 
score. The formulas used for the calculation of all the parameters mentioned are given 
below. 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 =  float(format(np. sqrt(mean_squared_error( y_test_orig, y_predict_orig)), ′. 3f′)) 
Figure 5. Regplot of charges vs. age.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 10 of 15
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
Figure 5. Regplot of charges vs. age. 
Regplot is a programme that plots data and fits a linear regression model. To evaluate 
the regression model, there are several mutually  incompatible alternatives. In Figure 6, 
there is a straight line that passes through the data, and it seems that body mass index 
(BMI) tends to increase a little bit. It is possible that the charges also tend to increase slightly. 
 
Figure 6. Regplot of charges vs. BMI. 
3.3. Step 3: Training and Evalua ting a Linear Regression Model 
In this step, the authors trained the linear regression model, but before training the 
model, the dataset was cleaned. Only the numerical values were taken, and the data were 
scaled. A standard scaler was used to scale the data. Scaling the data is important before 
feeding the data to the model. Once the data was scaled completely, the linear regression 
model was trained. The accuracy of the linear regression model came out to be 75.09%. 
After that, the linear regression model was evaluated by  finding the Root Mean Square 
Error ( RMSE ), Mean Squared Error ( MSE ), Mean Absolute Error ( MAE ), and adjusted r2 
score. The formulas used for the calculation of all the parameters mentioned are given 
below. 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 =  float(format(np. sqrt(mean_squared_error( y_test_orig, y_predict_orig)), ′. 3f′)) 
Figure 6. Regplot of charges vs. BMI.
3.3. Step 3: Training and Evaluating a Linear Regression Model
In this step, the authors trained the linear regression model, but before training the
model, the dataset was cleaned. Only the numerical values were taken, and the data
were scaled. A standard scaler was used to scale the data. Scaling the data is important
before feeding the data to the model. Once the data was scaled completely, the linear
regression model was trained. The accuracy of the linear regression model came out to
be 75.09%. After that, the linear regression model was evaluated by ﬁnding the Root
Mean Square Error ( RMSE ), Mean Squared Error ( MSE ), Mean Absolute Error ( MAE ), and
adjusted r2 score. The formulas used for the calculation of all the parameters mentioned are
given below.
RMSE =ﬂoat (format (np.sqrt (mean_squared_error (y_test_orig, y_predict_orig )), ’.3f’ ))
MSE =mean_squared_error (y_test_orig, y_predict_orig )
MAE =mean_absolute_error (y_test_orig, y_predict_orig )
r2=r2_score (y_test_orig, y_predict_orig )
adj_r2=1−(1−r2)×(n−1)/(n−k−1)
The output of the evaluation is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Evaluation metrics for the linear regression model.
Evaluation Metrics Value
RMSE 0.499
MSE 0.24908696
MAE 0.3445451
r2 0.7509130368819994
adjusted r2 0.7494136420701529
4. Results and Discussion
The ﬁnal step i.e., training and evaluating an ANN-based regression model is discussed
in this section. Initially, the entire dataset is split into 20% testing data and 80% training
data. In training the ANN model, the authors have used keras sequential model in which
ﬁve dense layers are added and ‘relu’ activation function is used. Adam optimiser is used
to optimise the performance of the model. Table 4 shows the model summary. The total
trainable parameters are 38,351 whereas there are 0 non-trainable parameters.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 11 of 15
Table 4. ANN model summary.
Layer (Type) Output Shape Number of Parameters
Dense (dense) (None, 50) 450
activation (activation) (None, 50) 0
dense_1 (None, 150) 7650
activation_1 (activation) (None, 150) 0
dense_2 (dense) (None, 150) 22,650
activation_2 (activation) (None, 50) 0
dense_3 (dense) (None, 50) 7550
activation_3 (activation) (None, 50) 0
dense_4 (dense) (None, 1) 51
The model was trained for 100 epochs, and the batch size was 20 with a validation
split equal to 0.2. The accuracy of this model came out to be 92.72%, and the validation and
training loss is plotted in Figure 7.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16 
 
 
Figure 7. Training loss vs. validation loss. 
Moreover, the model predictions and true values were also plotted to see the rela-
tionship between them. Figure 8 shows the pl ot of model predictions vs. true values, 
whereas Figure 9 shows the inverse transform plot of model predictions vs. true values. 
 
Figure 8. Model predictions vs. true values. 
Figure 7. Training loss vs. validation loss.
Moreover, the model predictions and true values were also plotted to see the relation-
ship between them. Figure 8 shows the plot of model predictions vs. true values, whereas
Figure 9 shows the inverse transform plot of model predictions vs. true values.
Once the ANN model was trained and the accuracy was calculated, then the perfor-
mance of the model was evaluated using the same performance metrics, i.e., RMSE ,MSE ,
MAE ,r2, and adjusted r2. Table 5 shows the comparison between the evaluation metrics of
our trained ANN model and the linear regression model. From the comparison, it is clear
that our trained model had better performance.
Here, one can compare Table 4 and can conclude that the evaluation metrics of our
trained model are better than those of the linear regression model. Finally, the correlation
matrix was plotted to see the positive and negative relationships among the multiple factors.
Here, after observing the correlation matrix in Figure 10, we can conclude that charges
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 12 of 15
are positively related to smoking and age, whereas southwest and northwest regions are
negatively related to charges.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16 
 
 
Figure 7. Training loss vs. validation loss. 
Moreover, the model predictions and true values were also plotted to see the rela-
tionship between them. Figure 8 shows the pl ot of model predictions vs. true values, 
whereas Figure 9 shows the inverse transform plot of model predictions vs. true values. 
 
Figure 8. Model predictions vs. true values. 
Figure 8. Model predictions vs. true values.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 16 
 
 
Figure 9. Inverse transform of model pr edictions vs. true values. 
Once the ANN model was trained and the accuracy was calculated, then the perfor-
mance of the model was evaluated using the same performance metrics, i.e., RMSE , MSE , 
MAE , r2, and adjusted r2. Table 5 shows the comparison between the evaluation metrics 
of our trained ANN model and the linear regr ession model. From the comparison, it is 
clear that our trained model had better performance. 
Table 5. Comparison of the evaluation metrics for th e trained ANN model vs. linear regression 
model. 
Evaluation Metrics ANN Value Linear Value 
RMSE 0.27 0.499 
MSE 0.07275635 0.24908696 
MAE 0.1432731 0.3445451 
r2 0.9272436488919791 0.7509130368819994 
adjusted r2 0.9268056874105162 0.7494136420701529 
Here, one can compare Table 4 and can conc lude that the evaluation metrics of our 
trained model are better than those of the line ar regression model. Fi nally, the correlation 
matrix was plotted to see the positive and negative relationships among the multiple fac-
tors. Here, after observing the correlation ma trix in Figure 10, we can conclude that 
charges are positively related to smoking and age, whereas southwest and northwest re-
gions are negatively related to charges. 
Figure 9. Inverse transform of model predictions vs. true values.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 13 of 15
Table 5. Comparison of the evaluation metrics for the trained ANN model vs. linear regression model.
Evaluation Metrics ANN Value Linear Value
RMSE 0.27 0.499
MSE 0.07275635 0.24908696
MAE 0.1432731 0.3445451
r2 0.9272436488919791 0.7509130368819994
adjusted r2 0.9268056874105162 0.7494136420701529
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 16 
 
 
Figure 10. Correlation matrix. 
5. Conclusions 
In the field of health insurance, machine learning is well-suited to tasks that are often 
performed by people at a slower speed. AI an d machine learning are capable of analysing 
and evaluating large volumes of data in order to streamline and simplify health insurance operations. The impact of machine learning on health insurance will save time and money 
for both policyholders and insurers. AI will handle repetitive activities, allowing insur-
ance experts to focus on processes that will  improve the policyholder’s experience. Pa-
tients, hospitals, physicians, and insurance providers will benefit from ML’s ability to ac-
complish jobs that are currently performed by people but are much faster and less expen-sive when performed by ML. When it comes to exploiting historical data, machine learn-
ing is one component of cognitive computing that may address various challenges in a 
broad array of applications and systems. Forecasting health insurance premiums is still a 
topic that has to be researched and addressed in  the healthcare business. In this study, the 
authors trained an ANN-based regression mo del to predict health insurance premiums. 
The model was then evaluated usin g key performance metrics, i.e., RMSE , MSE , MAE , r2, 
and adjusted r2. The accuracy of our model was 92.72%. Moreover, the correlation matrix 
was also plotted to see the relationship betw een various factors with the charges. This 
domain of insurance prediction has not been fully explored and requires thorough re-
search. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualisation, K.K. and A.B.; me thodology, K.K. and A.B.; software, 
K.K. and A.B.; validation, K.K. and A.B.; formal analysis, K.K. and A. B.; investigation, K.K. and A.B.; 
resources, A.D.D. and R.S.; data curation, K.K. an d A.B.; writing—original draft preparation, K.K. 
and A.B.; writing—review and editing, K.K. and A. B.; visualisation, K.K. and A.B.; supervision, 
A.D.D. and R.S.; project administration, A.D.D. an d R.S.; funding acquisition, A.D.D. and R.S. All 
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: This research received no external funding. 
Figure 10. Correlation matrix.
5. Conclusions
In the ﬁeld of health insurance, machine learning is well-suited to tasks that are often
performed by people at a slower speed. AI and machine learning are capable of analysing
and evaluating large volumes of data in order to streamline and simplify health insurance
operations. The impact of machine learning on health insurance will save time and money
for both policyholders and insurers. AI will handle repetitive activities, allowing insurance
experts to focus on processes that will improve the policyholder’s experience. Patients,
hospitals, physicians, and insurance providers will beneﬁt from ML’s ability to accomplish
jobs that are currently performed by people but are much faster and less expensive when
performed by ML. When it comes to exploiting historical data, machine learning is one
component of cognitive computing that may address various challenges in a broad array of
applications and systems. Forecasting health insurance premiums is still a topic that has to
be researched and addressed in the healthcare business. In this study, the authors trained
an ANN-based regression model to predict health insurance premiums. The model was
then evaluated using key performance metrics, i.e., RMSE ,MSE ,MAE ,r2, and adjusted r2.
The accuracy of our model was 92.72%. Moreover, the correlation matrix was also plotted
to see the relationship between various factors with the charges. This domain of insurance
prediction has not been fully explored and requires thorough research.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 14 of 15
Author Contributions: Conceptualisation, K.K. and A.B.; methodology, K.K. and A.B.; software,
K.K. and A.B.; validation, K.K. and A.B.; formal analysis, K.K. and A.B.; investigation, K.K. and
A.B.; resources, A.D.D. and R.S.; data curation, K.K. and A.B.; writing—original draft preparation,
K.K. and A.B.; writing—review and editing, K.K. and A.B.; visualisation, K.K. and A.B.; supervision,
A.D.D. and R.S.; project administration, A.D.D. and R.S.; funding acquisition, A.D.D. and R.S. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The dataset used in this research is publicly available at https://www.
kaggle.com/datasets/noordeen/insurance-premium-prediction (accessed on 20 June 2022).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Health Insurance Premium Prediction with Machine Learning. Available online: https://thecleverprogrammer.com/2021/10/26
/health-insurance-premium-prediction-with-machine-learning/ (accessed on 9 May 2022).
2. ul Hassan, C.A.; Iqbal, J.; Hussain, S.; AlSalman, H.; Mosleh, M.A.A.; Sajid Ullah, S. A Computational Intelligence Approach for
Predicting Medical Insurance Cost. Math. Probl. Eng. 2021 ,2021 , 1162553. [CrossRef]
3. Cevolini, A.; Esposito, E. From Pool to Proﬁle: Social Consequences of Algorithmic Prediction in Insurance. Big Data Soc. 2020 ,7.
[CrossRef]
4. van den Broek-Altenburg, E.M.; Atherly, A.J. Using Social Media to Identify Consumers’ Sentiments towards Attributes of Health
Insurance during Enrollment Season. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 2035. [CrossRef]
5. Hanafy, M.; Mahmoud, O.M.A. Predict Health Insurance Cost by Using Machine Learning and DNN Regression Models. Int. J.
Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng. 2021 ,10, 137–143. [CrossRef]
6. Bhardwaj, N.; Anand, R. Health Insurance Amount Prediction. Int. J. Eng. Res. 2020 ,9, 1008–1011. [CrossRef]
7. Boodhun, N.; Jayabalan, M. Risk Prediction in Life Insurance Industry Using Supervised Learning Algorithms. Complex Intell. Syst.
2018 ,4, 145–154. [CrossRef]
8. Goundar, S.; Prakash, S.; Sadal, P .; Bhardwaj, A. Health Insurance Claim Prediction Using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. Int. J. Syst.
Dyn. Appl. 2020 ,9, 40–57. [CrossRef]
9. Ejiyi, C.J.; Qin, Z.; Salako, A.A.; Happy, M.N.; Nneji, G.U.; Ukwuoma, C.C.; Chikwendu, I.A.; Gen, J. Comparative Analysis of
Building Insurance Prediction Using Some Machine Learning Algorithms. Int. J. Interact. Multimed. Artif. Intell. 2022 ,7, 75–85.
[CrossRef]
10. Rustam, Z.; Yaurita, F. Insolvency Prediction in Insurance Companies Using Support Vector Machines and Fuzzy Kernel C-Means.
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2018 ,1028 , 012118. [CrossRef]
11. Fauzan, M.A.; Murﬁ, H. The Accuracy of XGBoost for Insurance Claim Prediction. Int. J. Adv. Soft Comput. Appl. 2018 ,10, 159–171.
Available online: https://www.claimsjournal.com/news/national/2013/11/21/240353.htm (accessed on 9 May 2022).
12. Rukhsar, L.; Bangyal, W.H.; Nisar, K.; Nisar, S. Prediction of Insurance Fraud Detection Using Machine Learning Algorithms.
Mehran Univ. Res. J. Eng. Technol. 2022 ,41, 33–40. Available online: https://search.informit.org/doi/epdf/10.3316/informit.2631
47785515876 (accessed on 9 May 2022). [CrossRef]
13. Kumar Sharma, D.; Sharma, A. Prediction of Health Insurance Emergency Using Multiple Linear Regression Technique. Eur. J.
Mol. Clin. Med. 2020 ,7, 98–105.
14. Azzone, M.; Barucci, E.; Giuffra Moncayo, G.; Marazzina, D. A Machine Learning Model for Lapse Prediction in Life Insurance
Contracts. Expert Syst. Appl. 2022 ,191, 116261. [CrossRef]
15. Sun, J.J. Identiﬁcation and Prediction of Factors Impact America Health Insurance Premium. Master’s Thesis, National College of
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2020. Available online: http://norma.ncirl.ie/4373/ (accessed on 9 May 2022).
16. Lui, E. Employer Health Insurance Premium Prediction. Available online: http://cs229.stanford.edu/proj2012/Lui-
EmployerHealthInsurancePremiumPrediction.pdf (accessed on 17 May 2022).
17. Prediction of Health Expense—Predict Health Expense Data. Available online: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/0
5/prediction-of-health-expense/ (accessed on 9 May 2022).
18. Takeshima, T.; Keino, S.; Aoki, R.; Matsui, T.; Iwasaki, K. Development of Medical Cost Prediction Model Based on Statistical
Machine Learning Using Health Insurance Claims Data. Value Health 2018 ,21, S97. [CrossRef]
19. Yang, C.; Delcher, C.; Shenkman, E.; Ranka, S. Machine Learning Approaches for Predicting High Cost High Need Patient
Expenditures in Health Care. Biomed. Eng. Online 2018 ,17, 131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Shyamala Devi, M.; Swathi, P .; Purushotham Reddy , M.; Deepak Varma, V .; Praveen Kumar Reddy , A.; Vivekanandan, S.; Moorthy , P .
Linear and Ensembling Regression Based Health Cost Insurance Prediction Using Machine Learning. Smart Innov. Syst. Technol.
2021 ,224, 495–503. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 7898 15 of 15
21. Omar, T.; Zohdy, M.; Rrushi, J. Clustering Application for Data-Driven Prediction of Health Insurance Premiums for People of
Different Ages. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), Las Vegas, NV , USA,
10–12 January 2021. [CrossRef]
22. Sailaja, N.V .; Karakavalasa, M.; Katkam, M.; Devipriya, M.; Sreeja, M.; Vasundhara, D.N. Hybrid Regression Model for Medical
Insurance Cost Prediction and Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Systems,
Smart and Green Technologies (ICISSGT), Visakhapatnam, India, 13–14 November 2021; pp. 93–98. [CrossRef]
23. Dutta, K.; Chandra, S.; Gourisaria, M.K.; GM, H. A Data Mining Based Target Regression-Oriented Approach to Modelling
of Health Insurance Claims. In Proceedings of the 2021 5th International Conference on Computing Methodologies and
Communication (ICCMC), Erode, India, 8–10 April 2021; pp. 1168–1175. [CrossRef]